1. introduction:
if  you  want  to  lose  weight,  the  last  meal  should  be  taken  around  2  hours  before going to sleep. it is not recommended  to  feel  severely  hunger,  but 
rather  a  slight  hunger.  let’s  suppose  you  
will  listen  to  your  instinct  and  you  will  eat  
right  before  going  to  sleep.  this  way,  not  
only  you  will  not  lose  weight,  but  chances  
to store fat, as a result of the fact that when 
we  eat  metabolism  slowly  grows,  and  this  
effect  is  diminished  during  the  night,  when  
caloric  intake  is  reduced  to  the  level  of  
maintaining  basic  functions  of  the  body.  
consequently, the metabolic benefit that 
having a meal during the day might bring is 
turned into damage. a  meal  taken  right  before  sleep  not  only  
affects  the  process  of  losing  fat  during  the  
night, but it affects the next day’s 
metabolism. unconsumed energy reserves 
will affect the entire process of the next day’s
meals,  starting  with  breakfast  which,  in  this  
case,  might  be  skipped,  thus  depriving  the  
athlete of its numerous benefits. to  summarize,  we  believe  that  it  must  be  
taken into account that the last meal of day is 
taken at least an hour before sleep and it does 
not  include  high  amounts  of  carbohydrates,  
especially  those  with  high  glycemic  index  
(pasta, potatoes, sugar), because sudden 
increase of insulin affects the release of 
growth hormone during the night. to reduce hunger during night, it is 
recommended that throughout the day, 
small, healthy, nutritionally balanced meals 
are taken, at an interval of about 3 hours. the  last  meal  of  the  day  should  contain  
protein from fat free and low calories 
content food (baked chicken breast) and 
carbohydrates  from  fibrous  plant  food,  to  
stimulate bowel transit.
for those interested in muscle hypertrophy, 
a protein shake is recommended, containing 
casein, low absorption protein that will 
cause constant and long flow of amino 
acids in the blood and will protect the body 
against catabolic processes during the night. 
also, having a meal with fat free dairy 
products  (fat  free  cottage  cheese,  etc.)  is  a  
good choice.

2. the nutritional plan: 
an  optimal  nutritional  plan  will  consider  
reaching the set goal, take into account 
existing eating habits, possible medical 
conditions. together with nutritional 
supplements, it will have to sustain the 
effort made at the gym, but also lead 
towards the desired physical shape.  moreover, an efficient nutritional plan 
considers anthropometric data of the 
athlete,  the  existing  level  of  fat  and  his  
basic metabolism.  calculating the necessary number of 
calories is calculated after a scientific 
formula.  calories’  calculation  is  done  for  
the moment when the body is in total 
relaxation, rested, normal emotivity and the 
surrounding  temperature  is  between  18-20 
degrees celsius. the basic metabolism 
calculation depends on: weight, size, 
gender, age, mental state, diet, physical 
activity. world health organization 
(w.h.o.)  has  elaborated,  after  studies  on  
nutrition,  several  equations  with  which  we  
can  calculate  the  needed  calories.  in  the  
table below, the numbers are indexes 
established  by  w.h.o.  and  the  letters  are  
variables  of  which  w  =  weight  and  h  =  
height
ages for men (cal 
/ day) for women 
(cal / day) 
10-18 years 16,6w + 
77h + 572 7,4w + 482h 
+ 217 18-30 years 15,4w – 
27h + 717 13,3w + 
334h + 35 30-60 years 11,3w + 
16h + 901 8,7w – 25h 
+ 865 over 60 
years 8,8w + 
128h - 1071 9,2w + 637h 
- 321 

a correct nutritional plan includes all macro 
and micro-nutrients necessary to a good 
functioning of the body (carbohydrates, 
lipids, protides, vitamins and minerals). the 
key  to  any  long-term  nutrition  program  is  
consistency,but don’t worry about this 
being  a  boring  diet.  [1]  either  it  is  about  
bodybuilding  or  fitness  or  the  approach  to  
lose  or  gain  weight,  the  idea  of  keeping  on  
a diet is undoubtedly an act of will and total 
dedication, without which success is 
overdue. of course, keeping on a diet 
assumes  avoiding  some  common  mistakes  
that,  in  the  end,  may  destroy  the  athlete’s  
effort. here are some of them. consuming  many  calories  when  you  want  
to increase muscles is not a good idea 
because sooner or later the great amount of 
calories  will  turn  into  fat.  the  main  desire  
is  to  accumulate  muscles  and  not  cover  the  
body  with  fat.  therefore,  establishing  and  
thoroughly  complying  with  the  number  of  
calories needed, as well as the relations 
proteins/carbohydrates/fat is also a good 
move. in a study of bodybuilders during the 
twelve weeks before competition, male 
competitors reduced their caloric intake 
significantly during the latter half and 
subsequently lost the greatest amount of 
lbm in the final three weeks. [2]. 
competitive  bodybuilding  requires  cyclical 
periods  of  weight  gain  and  weight  loss  for  
competition [3]. many  of  those  who  are  on  a  diet  are  not  
patient enough,  “jumping”  from one diet to 
another, giving no chance to the initial plan. 
from experience, a diet requires at least one 
month to prove its effectiveness and for the 
body  to  get  used  to  the  new  conditions,  
either you are interested in losing weight or 
gaining weight. another  common  mistake  is  to  not  have  a  
day when you can cheat. mentally 
speaking, this day is very important, 
because  it  gives  resources  to  continue  the  
diet. it is preferable that the meal that 
includes “something else” is in the 
morning,  giving  the  body  the  possibility  to  
burn  the  excess  of  calories  during  the  day. 
certainly, cheating is beneficial, but 
exaggerating is counterproductive.  a  diet  often  fails  when  planning  the  entire  
this is badly done. the diet should be 
regarded  as  a  unitary  process  together  with  
a customized and efficient training 
programme which should not exclude 
cardio  exercises.  the  diet  should  not  be  
regarded  as  a  temporary  situation  or  as  a  
torture that you have to accept, but as a new 
and healthy way of living.  a  situation  that  generates  failure  is  when  
the  person  who  wants  to  lose  weight  does  
not eat enough. the body cannot 
distinguish  between  moderate  reduction  in  
calories and starvation and thus will reduce 
metabolic rate to fight the deficit of calories 
and loss of weight. to deal with this 
“boomerang” effect, you should increase 
metabolic rate through specific training 
programmes,  establish  a  caloric  deficit  of  
approximately  200  calories  below  the  level  
of maintenance and divide the total of 
calories ingested in 4-6 meals.  keeping  a  diary  of  the  types  and  quantities  
of  consumed  food  and  supplements  as  well  
as  their  conversion  into  calories,  in  a  table 
with nutritional information spares the 
athlete from unpleasant confusion and 
countless  blunders.  with  a  diary,  he  would  

be  able  to  figure  out  fast  what  mistakes  he  
has done or what food suits him best. it is a very good idea to keep diets found in 
all  kinds  of  magazines,  but  rather  to  use  
them  as  a  basic  guideline,  to  create  your  
own nutritional plan. the diet is an 
absolutely individual thing, as every 
individual is unique.  when you decided to start a diet, the use of 
alcohol should be avoided. alcohol brings a 
surplus of calories that the body 
metabolizes rather as fat than as 
carbohydrates, without any benefit for 
muscle growth or loss of weight. no  great  changes  should  be  made  all  of  a  
sudden.  the  body  must  have  time  to  adapt.  
for  those  who  want  to  grow  muscles,  a  
surplus of approximately 300 calories 
coming  from  quality  nutrients  guarantees  
muscle growth with minimum fat
accumulation. one of the major mistakes is 
when  the  person  who  is  on  a  diet  does  not  
drink  enough water. lack  of  water  may  
cause hunger and lead to dehydration. 
water is also responsible for body 
detoxification  and  the  good  functioning  of  
its systems. a minimum of 3 litres a day is 
absolutely necessary. competitive  bodybuilders  are  not  alone  in  
their risk and disposition towards behaviors 
that  carry  health  concerns.  elite  athletes  in  
aesthetic and weight-class sports as a whole 
share these risks,